chore(docs): add documentation for the replication controller (#2940)
open-component-model/open-component-model: website/content/docs/how-to/replicate-component-versions-controller.md

---
title: "Replicate Component Versions with the Controller"
description: "Transfer a component version between two OCM repositories using the Replication controller."
icon: "🔁"
weight: 37
toc: true
---

## Goal

Use the OCM Kubernetes controller to transfer a component version, together with

> the full graph of components it references, from one OCM repository to another.

Reviewer: > together with the full graph of components it references

again, completely dependent on the config, i believe

The transfer re-runs automatically whenever the source `Component` resolves to a
new version.

## Prerequisites

- [Controller environment]({{< relref "setup-controller-environment.md" >}}) set up
- The OCM CLI installed, to build and push the source component
- A source and a target OCI registry you can push to, with credentials that have
  write access (for example a
  [ghcr.io](https://docs.github.com/en/packages/learn-github-packages/introduction-to-github-packages)
  token with `write:packages`)

If you already have a component version in a source repository, skip the first
step and point the `Component` at it.

## How it works

A `Replication` references two objects:

- `spec.componentRef`, a `Component` that resolves and verifies the **source**
  version. The version that gets transferred is the one recorded in that
  `Component`'s status, so it has already been successfully reconciled.
- `spec.targetRepositoryRef`, the `Repository` the content is written to.

When the source `Component`'s resolved version changes, the controller walks the
component's reference graph and transfers every referenced component version into

> the target. It records the transferred version and digest in its status and

Reviewer: same issue

treats an unchanged digest as a no-op, so it never re-transfers content that is
already present.

> Transfer behaviour (recursion depth, copy mode, upload type) and the registry

Reviewer: > recursion depth

maybe just say recursion, as we currently do not really support a depth

Author: Fair fair. :D okay. :)

propagates to the `Replication`.

## Steps

{{< steps >}}
{{< step >}}

### Build a source component graph

To show recursion in action, build a small graph: a parent component that
references a child, each carrying a blob. Replicating the parent pulls the child
along with it.

```bash
echo "parent payload" > parent.txt
echo "child payload" > child.txt

cat <<EOF > component-constructor.yaml
components:
  - name: ocm.software/examples/replication/child
    version: 1.0.0
    provider:
      name: ocm.software
    resources:
      - name: data
        type: blob
        version: 1.0.0
        input:
          type: file
          path: ./child.txt
  - name: ocm.software/examples/replication/parent
    version: 1.0.0
    provider:
      name: ocm.software
    resources:
      - name: data
        type: blob
        version: 1.0.0
        input:
          type: file
          path: ./parent.txt
    componentReferences:
      - name: child
        componentName: ocm.software/examples/replication/child
        version: 1.0.0
EOF
```

Push both components to the source registry:

```bash
ocm add cv --repository ghcr.io/<source-namespace> --constructor component-constructor.yaml
```

> {{< callout context="note" title="Unique reference names" icon="outline/info-circle" >}}

Reviewer 2: This feels a bit out-of-place here. What has this info to do with the replication controller?

Author: Eyyy yeah, I fixed this by now, so I can remove this note. :)

Both repositories are plain `Repository` objects pointing at OCI registries. The
source holds the component you already published; the target is where the
transfer writes.

```bash
cat <<EOF > repositories.yaml
apiVersion: delivery.ocm.software/v1alpha1
kind: Repository
metadata:
  name: replication-source
spec:
  repositorySpec:
    baseUrl: ghcr.io/<source-namespace>
    type: OCIRepository
  interval: 10m
---
apiVersion: delivery.ocm.software/v1alpha1
kind: Repository
metadata:
  name: replication-target
spec:
  repositorySpec:
    baseUrl: ghcr.io/<target-namespace>
    type: OCIRepository
  interval: 10m
EOF
```

```bash
kubectl apply -f repositories.yaml
```

{{< /step >}}
{{< step >}}

### Create the transfer configuration and credentials

Store the transfer settings and the registry credentials in a single `Secret`
under the `.ocmconfig` key. The controller reads this as OCM configuration.

```bash
cat <<EOF > transfer-config.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: ocm-transfer-config
type: Opaque
stringData:
  .ocmconfig: |
    type: generic.config.ocm.software/v1
    configurations:
      - type: transfer.config.ocm.software
        recursive: -1

>         copyMode: localBlob

Reviewer: is `copyMode` local blob really the one most people would want?

Author: Do you think I should add the more complex descriptor of trying to configure Streaming from OCI - > OCI?

Reviewer: No, i was just wondering if `allResources` would be the more common use case. But since `localBlob` generally appears to be our default, it is fine!

Author: Okay. I added a tiny note about this using allResources. 👍

>         uploadType: ociArtifact

Reviewer: might deserve some comments explaining the options (and also emphasizing the cli equivalence)

Author: This is detailed further down on line 181. Do you think that's good enough?

Reviewer: Yeah, I think this is a nit. 

My intuition just feels like it should be the other way around in the guide. 
- `Replication` carrying the transfer config would be the case I describe as default
- Inheriting it from `Component` would be the case, I detail out / mention further down

Author: Got it! I'm updating this. :) 🙇

Author: Okay, I updated this AND I added a missing coverage for defining another object in the config list AND your own configuration and they should be merged.

      - type: credentials.config.ocm.software
        consumers:
          - identity:
              type: OCIRegistry
              hostname: ghcr.io
            credentials:
              - type: Credentials
                properties:
                  username: <username>
                  password: <token>
          - identity:
              type: OCIRepository
              hostname: ghcr.io
            credentials:
              - type: Credentials
                properties:
                  username: <username>

>                   password: <token>

Reviewer 2: we should only need `OCIRegistry`
```suggestion
```

Author: Oh I didn't even notice I had two of these. :D Thanks :D

EOF
```

```bash
kubectl apply -f transfer-config.yaml
```

The `transfer.config.ocm.software` entry controls the transfer itself:

- `recursive: -1` follows component references to unlimited depth (`0` disables
  recursion, a positive number limits it).
- `copyMode: localBlob` and `uploadType: ociArtifact` copy resource content into
  the target and re-upload OCI artifacts as artifacts rather than as plain blobs.

{{< callout context="note" title="Credential identities" icon="outline/info-circle" >}}
List a consumer for every host involved. If your source and target live on
different registries, add an entry per hostname. The `OCIRegistry` and

> `OCIRepository` identity types cover the pull and push paths used during a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
different registries, add an entry per hostname. The `OCIRegistry` 
identity type cover the pull and push paths used during a
```

We might link to the credential documentation here as well

transfer.
{{< /callout >}}

{{< /step >}}
{{< step >}}

### Create the source `Component`

The `Component` resolves the version to replicate. Reference the transfer `Secret`
with `policy: Propagate` so the configuration and credentials flow on to the
`Replication`.

```bash
cat <<EOF > component.yaml
apiVersion: delivery.ocm.software/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata:
  name: replication-component
spec:
  component: ocm.software/examples/replication/parent
  repositoryRef:
    name: replication-source
  semver: 1.0.0
  interval: 10m
  ocmConfig:
    - kind: Secret
      name: ocm-transfer-config
      policy: Propagate
EOF
```

```bash
kubectl apply -f component.yaml
```

Wait for it to become ready:

```bash
kubectl get component replication-component -o wide
```

{{< /step >}}
{{< step >}}

### Create the `Replication`

The `Replication` ties the source `Component` to the target `Repository`. It
inherits the transfer configuration and credentials propagated from the

> `Component`.

Reviewer: are you sure, you wouldn't want to advertise the transfer config being added to the `replication` cr as the default use case?

Author: Sorry, maybe it's too late, but I don't understand this sentence. :D 🙇

Reviewer: Currently, your scenario uses the config inheritance from `Component` to `Replication` to configure the `Replication` with the proper transfer config. So, in your scenario, the `Component` contains (or rather references) the transfer config instead of the `Replication` doing that itself directly.

I'm just wondering whether that is the default scenario.

Author: Ahhhh got it. :D Okay, that makes sense though.

Author: Wait, but I have this line:
```
Instead of relying on propagation, you can reference the configuration `Secret`
directly from the `Replication` with its own `spec.ocmConfig`. The effective
configuration is the combination of what the `Component` propagates, what the
`Replication` declares, and the target `Repository`'s configuration.
```

Isn't that good? :D

Reviewer 2: I agree with Fabian. It should be best-practice to use different configurations and we should promote it. In reality, of course, most people will use one config for everything :D

---
title: "Replicate Component Versions with the Controller"
description: "Transfer a component version between two OCM repositories using the Replication controller."
icon: "🔁"
weight: 37
toc: true
---

## Goal

Use the OCM Kubernetes controller to transfer a component version, together with
the full graph of components it references (if recursion is enabled), from one OCM
repository to another. The transfer re-runs automatically whenever the source
`Component` resolves to a new version.

## Prerequisites

> - [Controller environment]({{< relref "setup-controller-environment.md" >}}) set up

Reviewer 2: Actually, you just need a cluster + ocm controllers. You don't need kro or fluxcd. I would mention this

Author: Note added.

    configurations:
      - type: transfer.config.ocm.software/v1alpha1
        recursive: -1
        copyMode: localBlob
EOF
```

</details>

```bash
kubectl apply -f config.yaml
```

The `transfer.config.ocm.software` entry controls the transfer itself. Each key maps
directly to a flag on the `ocm transfer component-version` CLI command:

| Config key   | CLI flag           | Effect                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|--------------|--------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `recursive`  | `-r, --recursive`  | `-1` follows component references without limit; `0` disables recursion. The CLI flag is a boolean: set means `-1`, unset means `0`.                                                                                                                 |

> | `copyMode`   | `--copy-resources` | `localBlob` (default) includes only local-blob resources; `allResources` also pulls in remote OCI artifacts and Helm charts. Set the CLI flag for `allResources`, leave it unset for `localBlob`.                                                    |

Reviewer 3: tiniest nit:

> Set the CLI flag for `allResources`

Shouldn't the user set the config key and not the cli flag since we are running in the controller?

Author: This is just a comparison to the CLI flags with the controller options.

| `uploadType` | `-u, --upload-as`  | How resources are stored in the target: `default` lets the transfer decide, `localBlob` embeds them in the descriptor, `ociArtifact` uploads them as separate OCI artifacts (OCI target only). Only relevant for resources that `copyMode` includes. |

The example sets `recursive: -1` and `copyMode: localBlob` because the sample components
carry blob resources, and omits `uploadType` to let the transfer choose the right storage

> for the OCI target. To use streaming for resources that are themselves OCI artifacts, set

Reviewer 4: nit: I believe streaming isn't documented anywhere, so users might be confused about what it is and what alternatives exist.
If I understand correctly, transfer can be done either by downloading and uploading resources or through direct streaming.

Author: That's true, it's not documented, but I would rather mention it here and now, then having to update this document as well (and having to remember to update this document) once there are other documents talking about streaming other than the ADR. :D I would absolutely forget to update this. :)

Reviewer 2: do we plan to add any documents about streaming?

Reviewer: I think this is a rather technical optimization and rather something for developer documentation. Not sure if this guide is the right level for it.

Author: no idea :)

{{< /step >}}
{{< step >}}

### Create the source `Component`

The `Component` resolves the version to replicate. Reference the `ocm-credentials`
`Secret` with `policy: Propagate` so the credentials flow on to the
`Replication`.

<details>
  <summary>component.yaml</summary>

```bash
cat <<EOF > component.yaml
apiVersion: delivery.ocm.software/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata:
  name: replication-component
spec:
  component: ocm.software/examples/replication/parent
  repositoryRef:
    name: replication-source
  semver: 1.0.0
  interval: 10m
  ocmConfig:
    - kind: Secret
      name: ocm-credentials
      policy: Propagate
EOF
```

</details>

```bash
kubectl apply -f component.yaml
```

Wait for it to become ready:

```bash
kubectl get component replication-component -o wide
```

{{< /step >}}
{{< step >}}

### Create the `Replication`

The `Replication` ties the source `Component` to the target `Repository`. It
declares the transfer settings through its own `ocmConfig`. Because declaring an
`ocmConfig` opts out of automatic inheritance from the parent, it also references
the `Component` explicitly to pull in the registry credentials the `Component`
propagates.

> 

Reviewer 2: This looked quite boring :D and it won't show us when its ready

```
$> kubectl get replication replication-example -w
NAME                  AGE
replication-example   93s
```

Author: :D 

Ok. :) Can use owide instead.
